.ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el .ds Aq '
.TH BASE91 1 2026-03 base91 "User Commands"
.SH NAME
base91 \- basE91 encode or decode FILE, or standard input, to standard output.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBbase91\fR [\fB\-d\fR|\fB\-\-decode\fR] [\fB\-o\fR|\fB\-\-output\fR] [\fB\-m\fR|\fB\-\-buffer\fR] [\fB\-v\fR|\fB\-\-verbose\fR]... [\fB\-w\fR|\fB\-\-wrap\fR] [\fB\-\-simd\fR] [\fB\-h\fR|\fB\-\-help\fR] [\fB\-V\fR|\fB\-\-version\fR] [\fIFILE\fR] 
.SH DESCRIPTION
basE91 encode or decode FILE, or standard input, to standard output.
.PP
With no FILE, or when FILE is \-, read standard input.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-decode\fR
Decode data instead of encoding.
.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-output\fR \fI<FILE>\fR
Write output to FILE instead of standard output.
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-buffer\fR \fI<SIZE>\fR
Use SIZE bytes of memory for I/O buffers (suffixes: b, K, M). Default: 64K.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Print statistics to stderr. Repeat (\-vv) for extra verbosity.
.TP
\fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-wrap\fR \fI<COLS>\fR
Wrap encoded lines after COLS characters (0 = no wrap; default 76). With \-\-simd, COLS must be a multiple of 32. Has no effect when decoding.
.TP
\fB\-\-simd\fR
Use the SIMD fixed\-width variant for encoding. Output begins with \*(Aq\-\*(Aq and uses the SIMD alphabet (0x23\-0x26, 0x28\-0x7E); not compatible with legacy Henke decoders. Ignored when decoding.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Print help (see a summary with \*(Aq\-h\*(Aq)
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print version
.TP
[\fIFILE\fR]
Input file (default: stdin).
.SH EXTRA
Examples:
  base91 file.bin > file.b91            encode binary file
  base91 \-d file.b91 > file.bin         decode
  b91enc < file.bin > file.b91          encode with no line wrapping
  b91dec < file.b91 > file.bin          decode
  base91 \-\-simd file.bin > file.b91s    encode with SIMD variant
  tar czf \- dir/ | b91enc               encode tar stream
.SH VERSION
v0.2.1
.SH AUTHORS
Joachim Henke (algorithm); Frederic Ruget (Rust port)
