.\" SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2026 Frederic Ruget <fred@atlant.is> (GitHub: @douzebis)
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH BASE91 3 2026-03 "base91 0.2.0" "Library Functions Manual"
.SH NAME
basE91_init,
basE91_encode,
basE91_encode_end,
basE91_decode,
basE91_decode_end
\- basE91 binary-to-text encoding and decoding
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <base91.h>
.PP
.B struct basE91 {
.B "    unsigned long  queue;"
.B "    unsigned int   nbits;"
.B "    int            val;"
.B };
.PP
.BI "void   basE91_init      (struct basE91 *" b );
.PP
.BI "size_t basE91_encode    (struct basE91 *" b ,
.BI "                         const void *"   i ,
.BI "                         size_t "        len ,
.BI "                         void *"         o );
.PP
.BI "size_t basE91_encode_end(struct basE91 *" b ,
.BI "                         void *"          o );
.PP
.BI "size_t basE91_decode    (struct basE91 *" b ,
.BI "                         const void *"   i ,
.BI "                         size_t "        len ,
.BI "                         void *"         o );
.PP
.BI "size_t basE91_decode_end(struct basE91 *" b ,
.BI "                         void *"          o );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The basE91 functions encode and decode binary data using the basE91
binary-to-text encoding invented by Joachim Henke.
basE91 encodes arbitrary binary data as a sequence of printable ASCII
characters using a 91-character alphabet, achieving a worst-case overhead
of approximately 23% (compared to Base64's 33%).
.PP
All functions operate on a caller-allocated
.B struct basE91
state object
.IR b ,
which must be initialised with
.B basE91_init
before first use.
The struct layout is identical to the original C reference implementation, so
existing callers can replace
.I base91.{c,h}
with this library at link time without source changes.
.SS basE91_init
Initialises (or resets) the state struct pointed to by
.IR b .
Must be called before the first
.B basE91_encode
or
.B basE91_decode
call, and may be called again to reuse the struct for a new stream.
.SS basE91_encode
Encodes
.I len
bytes from the buffer
.I i
and writes the encoded characters to
.IR o .
Returns the number of bytes written to
.IR o .
.PP
The output buffer
.I o
must have room for at least
.RI ceil( len " * 16 / 13) + 2"
bytes.
State is carried across calls in
.IR b ,
so large inputs may be fed in chunks of any size.
.PP
After the last chunk,
.B basE91_encode_end
must be called to flush any remaining bits.
.SS basE91_encode_end
Flushes any bits remaining in the encoder state and writes 0, 1, or 2
trailing characters to
.IR o .
Returns the number of bytes written.
Resets the state so that
.I b
can be reused for a new stream (equivalent to calling
.B basE91_init
again).
.SS basE91_decode
Decodes
.I len
basE91 characters from
.I i
and writes the decoded bytes to
.IR o .
Returns the number of bytes written to
.IR o .
.PP
Non-alphabet bytes (whitespace, newlines, etc.) are silently ignored,
matching the behaviour of the reference implementation.
The output buffer
.I o
must have room for at least
.RI floor( len " * 14 / 16) + 1"
bytes.
State is carried across calls in
.IR b .
.PP
After the last chunk,
.B basE91_decode_end
must be called to flush any remaining partial value.
.SS basE91_decode_end
Flushes any remaining partial decode value and writes 0 or 1 byte to
.IR o .
Returns the number of bytes written.
Resets the state.
.SH RETURN VALUE
.BR basE91_encode ,
.BR basE91_encode_end ,
.BR basE91_decode ,
and
.B basE91_decode_end
return the number of bytes written to
.IR o .
The functions never fail; there is no error return.
.SH EXAMPLES
Encode a buffer in one shot:
.PP
.RS
.nf
struct basE91 b;
unsigned char out[BASE91_ENCODE_SIZE(inlen)]; /* or heap-allocate */
size_t n;

basE91_init(&b);
n  = basE91_encode(&b, in, inlen, out);
n += basE91_encode_end(&b, out + n);
/* out[0..n-1] contains the encoded data */
.fi
.RE
.PP
Decode a buffer:
.PP
.RS
.nf
struct basE91 b;
unsigned char out[BASE91_DECODE_SIZE(inlen)];
size_t n;

basE91_init(&b);
n  = basE91_decode(&b, in, inlen, out);
n += basE91_decode_end(&b, out + n);
/* out[0..n-1] contains the decoded data */
.fi
.RE
.PP
Encode a file stream in chunks:
.PP
.RS
.nf
struct basE91 b;
unsigned char ibuf[4096], obuf[6000];
size_t nr, nw;

basE91_init(&b);
while ((nr = fread(ibuf, 1, sizeof ibuf, fin)) > 0) {
    nw = basE91_encode(&b, ibuf, nr, obuf);
    fwrite(obuf, 1, nw, fout);
}
nw = basE91_encode_end(&b, obuf);
fwrite(obuf, 1, nw, fout);
.fi
.RE
.SH NOTES
The
.B struct basE91
fields are part of the public ABI (the struct is not opaque) and may be
stack-allocated, exactly as with the original C reference implementation.
Do not modify the fields directly; use
.B basE91_init
to reset.
.PP
The encoding ratio is data-dependent: each 13 or 14 bits of input are
encoded as 2 characters.
The worst case (all-ones input) yields a 22.97% overhead; the best case
(all-zeros) yields 14.29% overhead; random data averages approximately 20%.
.PP
This implementation is the Rust port by Frederic Ruget, compiled to a
C-compatible shared and static library.
The algorithm was invented by Joachim Henke; the original C source is
available at <http://base91.sourceforge.net/>.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR base91 (1),
.BR b91enc (1),
.BR b91dec (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Algorithm and original C implementation by Joachim Henke.
.br
Rust port and this library by Frederic Ruget.
